#summary Open Delta release notes.
#labels releasenotes

= Milestone 7 =

== General Release Notes: ==
The Milestone 7 (M7) release has progressed work on the DELTA Editor and Intkey.

The DELTA software is considered an alpha release.  Please make a copy of your existing DELTA data sets before accessing them with any of the Open DELTA programs.

==DELTA Editor Release Notes:==

====New Features====
 * Implemented the image settings dialog
 * Implemented directive file editing
 * Further work on import/export functionality
 * Various bug fixes

====Known Problems====
 * ISSUE 36 - Can't add new character in grid view when there are zero characters
 * ISSUE 37 - Help is still missing
 * ISSUE 41 - Editor does not support importing chars or items into an existing data set.
 * ISSUE 42 - Action sets hooked up to old CONFOR/KEY/DIST
 * ISSUE 44 - Search menu missing from Editor
 * ISSUE 49 - The character edit dialog can be closed, and the selected character can change even if a validation error is present.
 * ISSUE 50 - Multistate characters with zero states are not validated

==Intkey Release Notes:==

====New Features==== 
 * Implemented taxon information dialog
 * Added support for remotely hosted datasets
 * Added tooltips for toolbar buttons and menu items
 * Reworked directive handling to support ?,?K,?L and ?S wildcards
 * Implemented DELETE, CHARACTERS and ILLUSTRATE TAXA directives
 * Basic implementation of the DESCRIBE directive
 * Fixed various image display problems

====Known Problems====
 * ISSUE 33 - Layout of character state image overlays can be untidy

= Milestone 6 =

== General Release Notes: ==
The Milestone 6 (M6) release has progressed work on the DELTA Editor and Intkey.

The DELTA software is considered an alpha release.  Please make a copy of your existing DELTA data sets before accessing them with any of the Open DELTA programs.

==DELTA Editor Release Notes:==

====New Features====
 * Image Overlays can be added and edited.

====Known Problems====
 * ISSUE 15 - Real numeric characters cannot be edited in locales with a ',' as a decimal separator.
 * ISSUE 16 - no key combination to exit Complex-Attribute Editor pane
 * ISSUE 17 - no key combination to exit Complex-Attribute Editor pane
 * Status updates during import and export are not complete.
 * The cimages and timages directives don't import correctly.
 * Import / Export could use further testing.
 * Hotspots cannot be edited using the dialog. 

==Intkey Release Notes:==

====New Features====
 * INCLUDE CHARACTERS directive
 * INCLUDE TAXA directive
 * EXCLUDE CHARACTERS directive
 * EXCLUDE TAXA directive
 * SET TOLERANCE directive
 
 * Characters and taxa can now be searched for in the main window
 * Support for character, taxon, keyword and startup images
 * Buttons can be defined and added to the toolbar using directives files
 

====Known Problems====
 * Datasets that are hosted on a remote server cannot be used.
 * Image notes and character notes are currently not displayed.
 * Switching to full screen mode when viewing a character, taxon or keyword image does not currently work correctly.
 * Some toolbar buttons defined using directives files may not function correctly due to the directives that they run not yet being implemented. In addition, there is currently no support for the directive wildcards ?, ?K, ?L, ?L1 and ?S. Any buttons that use these wildcards will not function correctly.
 * The text color of image overlays does not invert when the overlay is selected. Hence once an overlay is selected, its text will no longer be visible.


= Milestone 5 =

== General Release Notes: ==
The Milestone 5 (M5) release has progressed work on the DELTA Editor and Intkey.

There is now a Spanish language translation available.  (thanks to Roberto Castro-Cortes).

The DELTA software is considered an alpha release.  Please make a copy of your existing DELTA data sets before accessing them with any of the Open DELTA programs.

==DELTA Editor Release Notes:==

====New Features====
 * The character dependency editors have been implemented.
 * Character and Taxon images can be displayed including any included overlays.
 * The directive file export function has been implemented.

====Known Problems====
 * ISSUE 15 - Real numeric characters cannot be edited in locales with a ',' as a decimal separator.
 * ISSUE 16 - no key combination to exit Complex-Attribute Editor pane
 * ISSUE 17 - no key combination to exit Complex-Attribute Editor pane
 * Status updates during import and export are not complete.
 * The cimages and timages directives don't import correctly.
 * Import / Export could use further testing.
 
==CONFOR Release Notes:==

====New Features====
 * TRANSLATE INTO DELTA FORMAT has begun implementation.

====Known Problems====
 * The DECIMAL PLACES directive is not supported.
 * If the output file is changed between the items and chars files the last output file will win.

==Intkey Release Notes:==

Intkey can now be used to conduct basic investigations. We would appreciate any feedback that the community has at this point.

====New Features====
 * BEST ordering of dataset characters has been implemented
 * DIFFERENCES report has been implemented

====Known Problems====
 * An out of memory exception will be thrown if the content of a differences report is too large
 * Differences report yields incorrect results when Intkey's match type option is set to "Subset". This is an advanced feature and is currently only evident when using the command text bar. This issue needs investigation.

= Milestone 4 =

== General Release Notes: ==

The Milestone 4 (M4) release has progressed work on the DELTA Editor and Intkey.

There is now a French language translation available. (thanks to Yves Braet).

The DELTA software is considered an alpha release.  Please make a copy of your existing DELTA data sets before accessing them with any of the Open DELTA programs.

===Bug Fixes===
 * ISSUE 11 - Can't compile from source.

==DELTA Editor Release Notes:==

====New Features====
 * The character editor is largely complete.
 * ISSUE 13 - Select All and Copy Selected Including Headers missing
 * ISSUE 14 - Character and state editing

====Bug Fixes====
 * ISSUE 12 - Changing look and feel does not refresh existing views

====Known Problems====
 * Some warnings and validations are missing from the Character Editor.
 * New characters are created as unordered multistate by default.
 * States cannot be reordered using drag and drop in the Tree View.
 * The controlling attributes tab on the character editor is not complete.
 * The image related functionality on the Item editor is not complete.

==Intkey Release Notes==
===New Features===
 * CHANGE directive implemented
 * USE directive completed

Intkey can now be used to conduct a basic identification of a specimen. Character values can be entered/changed by double clicking on items in the _Available Characters_ and _Used Characters_ panes and following the prompts. Alternatively, _USE_ and _CHANGE_ commands can be entered into the command bar at the bottom of the application window.

----

= Milestone 3 =

== General Release Notes: ==

The Milestone 3 (M3) release has progressed work on the DELTA Editor, Intkey and CONFOR.

There is now a Czech language translation available. (thanks to Michal Manas).

The DELTA software is considered an alpha release.  Please make a copy of your existing DELTA data sets before accessing them with any of the Open DELTA programs.

==DELTA Editor Release Notes:==

====New Features====
 * Items can be added / inserted / deleted using a right click menu on the tree and grid views.
 * Items can be reordered using drag and drop on the tree and grid views.
 * The attribute editor now supports undo and the behaviour of the enter key can be modified to change the selected item or character.
 * "Simple" attributes can now be edited inline in the tree view.
 * "Simple" multistate attributes can now be edited inline in the tree view or using the check boxes in the attribute editor.
 * Some tidy up of the look and feel (grid row heights, selection highlighting, single click editing).
 * Validation has been added to the item editor.
 * Some support for displaying and editing images to items has been added.  This remains incomplete.
 * The save menu item is only enabled when a dataset has been modified.

====Known Problems====
 * The image related functionality on the Item editor is only partially complete.


==Intkey Release Notes==
===New Features===

 * DEFINE CHARACTERS directive implemented.
 * RESTART directive partially implemented - optional switches not handled.
 * USE directive partially implemented - users can add values for characters through the command bar or by double-clicking on entries in the "Available Characters" pane. The "Available Characters" and "Used Characters" panes are updated when this is done.
 * Various user interface tweaks including the additional of the toolbar buttons to the "Available Characters" and "Available Taxa" panes.

==CONFOR Release Notes==

====New Features====
 * The OMIT TYPESETTING MARKS directive is now supported.
 * The TYPESETTING MARKS directive is now supported.

====Bug Fixes====
 * ISSUE 10 - default values for directives are now supported, but have not yet been specified for all directives.

====Known Problems====
 * Error detection and validation of DELTA files is not fully implemented.  Any errors encountered are likely to abort the program.

----


= Milestone 2 =

==General Release Notes:==

The Milestone 2 (M2) release has progressed work on the DELTA Editor and produced initial prototypes of 
the CONFOR and Intkey programs.
As per Milestone 1, M2 is an alpha release and should not be used with production data.  You should make
a copy of your existing DELTA data sets before accessing them with any of the 
Open DELTA programs.

To reflect the additional programs included in M2, the packaging of the downloads have been modified:
 * The installers now install the programs: Intkey, CONFOR and the DELTA Editor.
 * The jar file distribution has been replaced with a .zip/.tar.gz distribution.
 * The JNLP launcher has been removed.



==DELTA Editor Release Notes:==

===New Features:===

 * Implicit values are displayed correctly (ISSUE 4)
 * Characters made inapplicable are displayed correctly
 * New datasets can be created
 * DELTA text files can be imported into a new data set (only).
 * The user will be asked to if they want to save before closing a modified data set.
 * The Item/Taxon editor has been created, but item images are not yet supported.
 * Better support for Mac OS 10 menu bar.
 * Enter/shift Enter key in attribute editor advances/reverses selection. (ISSUE 9)
 * Special characters can be entered using key combinations as per the existing editor
 * The recent file list appears on the File menu.
 * Copy/Paste menus implemented. (ISSUE 5)
 * A new "Copy All" feature introduced to allow easy copy and paste into Excel. (ISSUE 5)

===Bug Fixes:===

 * ISSUE 3 - Some non-letter symbols not displayed correctly in states
 * ISSUE 6 - RTF formatting not displayed correctly
 * ISSUE 8 - text not scrolling

==CONFOR Release Notes:==

===New Features:===

 * Supports the following directives:
   * NUMBER OF CHARACTERS 
   * MAXIMUM NUMBER OF STATES
   * MAXIMUM NUMBER OF ITEMS
   * CHARACTER TYPES
   * NUMBERS OF STATES
   * CHARACTER LIST
   * ITEM DESCRIPTIONS
   * PRINT FILE
   * LISTING FILE
   * IMPLICIT VALUES

 * Partial support for:
   * TRANSLATE INTO (only NATURAL LANGAUGE currently supported, and only plain text output is produced)
   * PRINT WIDTH 
   * OMIT REDUNDANT VARIANT ATTRIBUTES
   * INSERT REDUNDANT VARIANT ATTRIBUTES
   * INSERT IMPLICIT VLAUES


===Known Problems:===

 * Error detection and reporting is not fully implemented. (i.e. errors will normally result in program termination).
 * Some directives (not listed above) are partially implemented and may produce incorrect results.
 * Typesetting marks are omitted regardless of whether the OMIT TYPESETTING MARKS directive is used.



==IntKey Release Notes:==

===New Features:===

 * Intkey data files can be opened and the characters and taxa displayed.
 * The advanced mode command interpreter functionality has been implemented.



----



= Milestone 1 =

The goals of milestone 1 of the Open DELTA project are:

 * To formally establish the project, including tool chain and build environment
 * To demonstrate and experiment with packaging and publishing options
 * Investigate and address some of the risk issues identified during the scoping exercise:
   * Java port of the slot file (`*`.dlt) backing store
   * RTF processing and editing
   * Context sensitive help system and "Tooltip" style assistance
   * Internationalization and Localization
   * Potential performance issues, including startup time, User Interface responsiveness and general processing performance.


For installation instructions see the [InstallationInstructions Installation Instructions].

*Please note:* Milestone 1 is an alpha release, and should not be used with production data. You should make a copy of your existing Delta data sets before opening them with this version.


== DELTA Editor ==

===New Features===

 * Existing .dlt files can be opened and viewed using the DELTA Editor. Both grid view and tree view attribute editors have been implemented.
 * Save and Save As are implemented
 * Simplified Chinese and Spanish languages. The current locale and language are taken from operating system settings, but can be overridden for demonstration purposes by supplying command line arguments when launching the jar file:
 To view Chinese captions, for example, launch the editor from the command line with the following command (assuming the jar file is in the current working directory):
{{{
   java -Duser.region=CN -Duser.language=zh -jar delta-editor-1.0-M1-with-dependencies.jar
}}}

 To view Spanish captions, use:
{{{
   java -Duser.region=ES -Duser.language=es -jar delta-editor-1.0-M1-with-dependencies.jar
}}}

*Note* Chinese and Spanish localisations have been chosen arbitrarily for demonstrative purposes. Please contact the project team should you be willing and able to contribute additional language translations.

 * Existing Taxon attributes can be edited, although state check boxes are currently read only
 * Help system (including context sensitive help) demonstration
 * Windows installer with or without a bundled Java Runtime Environment
 * Cross platform support.  Currently the application has been tested on Windows XP, Windows 7, Mac OS 10.6.6 (x86) and Ubuntu Linux.

===Bug Fixes===
 * Issue 1: 	Attached dlt file causes issues

===Known Problems===
 * The Save menu item is not enabled only when a file has been modified.
 * Features are still missing from read only mode, including Controlling/Controlled Attributes, Implicit values, Mandatory values.
 * Items and Characters cannot be edited, added, re-ordered or deleted.